---
title: "Do voters still exhibit stable links to established parties in advanced
democracies, and if not why not?"
date: "HT 2018 Week 8"
author: "Zhenghong Lieu"
---

In this essay, I argue that voters still exhibit stable links to established
parties in advanced democracies—despite the fact that voters have changed
greatly in the past few decades—in a process of *realignment* rather than
*dealignment*. Further, the fact that voters have realigned to become partisan
has implications for several open questions in political science. I identify
two important dichotomies—of materialism/post-materialism and
sociological/institutional voting—and show that the realignment of the
electorate lead us to the right answer of these dichotomies.

\begin{center} $\clubsuit$~$\clubsuit$~$\clubsuit$ \end{center}

It's important to point out that whether or not voters still exhibit stable
links to established parties in advanced democracies depends on the slice of
"voters" we are looking at, as the electorate is not a monolithic whole.
Rather, an electorate of voters consists of a bunch of distinct "slices" of age
cohorts which possess very different political views. In this essay, I will
largely focus on incoming cohorts rather than already-voting cohorts, as
scholars like @inglehart_1981 and @tilley_2003 have shown that political views
are largely determined during the "critical period" of young adulthood, and
change very little over time. Therefore, most electoral change is
*intergenerational* rather than intragenerational: the changing composition of
incoming and outgoing cohorts makes up the vast majority of electoral change. I
argue that forces in our current era lead *new voters* to partisanship or
independence, and show that they lead to interesting results in both
post-materialism and electoral choice theory.

\begin{center} $\clubsuit$~$\clubsuit$~$\clubsuit$ \end{center}

## What sets this cohort apart from previous ones?
To determine if new voters are more likely to become partisan or independent,
it is first important to lay out how new voters differ from previous age
cohorts. Very broadly, voters have become more educated and more
post-materialist, a continuation of the trends that have been in motion over
the past few decades. The rapid expansion of the Internet have also resulted in
a profusion of new media sources, which has had a profound effect on the
electorate as well.

I show that these changes, among others, have resulted in greater partisan
alignment than was predicted by the scholarship.

## Realignment v. dealignment

In the 1950s and 60s, voters were very centrist and very predictable. Parties
were 'catch-all' parties that absorbed many smaller, fringe interests; the
political system had "frozen", as put forward by Lipset and Rokkan (1967). This
changed completely in the 70s and 80s, where frozen alignments and strong
partisan attachments gave way to large voter volatility: established parties
were no longer secure, and new, single-issue parties enjoyed electoral success.

Many scholars rushed to explain this sudden defreezing: the consensus was that
traditional lines of cleavage had ceased to become relevant as the makeup of
the electorate changed radically. For example, the traditional
working-class/middle class cleavage weakened in the 70s and 80s with the rise
of the new white-collar worker. In addition, new issues such as sexual freedom,
human rights and environmental protection arose that "cross-cut" across
traditional cleavages. For these reasons, voters in the 70s and 80s identified
less with traditional, established parties, and chose to vote for new parties
that placed a high priority on these shifting cleavages.

@flanagan_and_dalton_1982 argued that there were two equally plausible, yet
mutually contradictory theories to explain the changing of cleavages. Either it
was *realignment*, where parties and their electorates adjust to adopt new
cleavage dimensions, or it was *dealignment*, a permanent decrease in the
relevance of established parties and partisanship of voters. At the time of
writing, both mechanisms seemed plausible. Flanagan and Dalton claimed that
"signs of dealignment are clearest in the United States... [there is] a clear
decline in these partisan loyalties, a weakening of cross-generational partisan
inheritances, and a rise in anti-party sentiment" (p. 18).

Flanagan and Dalton argued that greater education and the rise of the news media
would lead to dealignment: I find that the reverse effect occurred due to
unexpected effects they did not foresee.

For example one traditional role of a party is to present and package a set of
ideological preferences and policy stances and give their voters a "cognitive
shortcut". Flanagan and Dalton argued that with increasing education, voters no
longer need to take the cognitive shortcut and can evaluate issues on their own
merit. If that is the case, then we should see dealignment. But on the other
hand, voters may not wish to expend this mental effort despite having the
abiity to do so, and also education causes people to hold more coherent (i.e.
partisan) views. In that case we should see greater partisanship.

The other example is oversight and watchdog roles: traditionally, parties in
the Opposition made sure that the incumbent government was responsible and
fulfilling its mandate to the people. On the one hand, this role
has largely been taken up by the news media. On the other hand, the ubiquity of
the Internet, the rise of new media sources, and the nature of algorithmic
content means that a voter could get all of his information from similar biased
sources, causing an "echo chamber" effect that leads to partisanism.

We know now, moreoever, that realignment was the correct mechanism; established
parties simply co-opted new issues and cleavage dimensions to fit the new breed
of voters. @levendusky_2012 and other scholars have pointed out the "partisan
polarisation" of the electorate, with differing explanations; however, the fact
that the electorate *has* polarised and still identifies with traditional
political parties is indisputable.

## Materialism v. post-materialism: have parties adapted to post-materialist concerns?

There exist two competing explanations for the state of established parties.
One is that parties have remained "frozen" still to a great extent, largely
reflecting traditional issue dimensions and social cleavages first laid down in
the 19th century.  The second is that parties constantly change and adapt their
policies and stances to best capture the electorate. In particular, one big
shift in electoral dynamics has been the shift from materialism to
post-materialism (best explained by Maslow's heirarchy of needs): as the
electorate gets richer, they prioritise material values less and higher-order
values more.

@inglehart_1981 argued that we have seen a shift from materialism to
post-materialism as advanced democracies enjoy economic growth, and the
electorate has its economic needs met. I show that established parties have
successfully positioned themselves on both materialist and post-materialist
issues, encouraging younger, post-Materialist cohorts to become partisan.

Inglehart showed that voters with post-Materialist values were more
dissatisfied with established parties as they had been very Materialist at the
time of writing (1981). It is true that voters will not identify with established
parties if the issues they prioritise do not take into account post-Materialist
values. Flanagan and Dalton made a similar argument: traditional parties were
unwilling to take unambiguous and decisive stances on narrow and cross-cutting
issues such as the environment, nuclear power and LGBTQ rights.

If it is the case that parties have not adapted to post-materialist concerns,
then cohorts will not care as much about established parties. However, the
issue dimensions of the present seem to suggest that established parties have
successfully co-opted post-Materialist concerns. We still have materialist
concerns like tariffs and taxes, but also semi-materialist concerns like
welfare, healthcare, and post-materialist concerns like abortion, feminism, gay
and transgender rights, immigration, freedom of religion and so on, and parties
(Democrat v. Republican, Labour v. Conservative) have taken clear and distinct
stances on them. This phenomenon is grounded empirically by Levendusky,
who shows that the increasing polarisation of political elites results in
parties being clearer and more consistent about their stances on issues, and
voters then change their ideology to fit their party identification.

## Sociological v. institutional: do voters use rational choice or societal cleavages in choosing their partisan identity?

Two competing theories of voter choice give different predictions with regard
to whether voters have dealigned or realigned. The sociological mechanism
predicts that voters join parties that represent their social class and
identity. In contrast, the institutional model predicts that voters vote to
maximise their expected utility.

If the sociological mechanism is more relevant and voters use their societal
identity to join a party, then this would predict that voters become less
attached to any one party as traditional societal cleavages become less
relevant, supporting the dealignment hypothesis. On the other hand, if voters
vote to maximise their utility, then whether or not voters continue to exhibit
partisan behaviour depends on our model of voters' utility. There are several
such models: the Downsian proximity model (1957), the directional model @rabinowitz_macdonald_1989 
and the issue-priorty model by Budge and Farlie (1983).

The traditional proximity model would predict that parties should move toward
the center in equilibrium, and does not support the partisan hypothesis.
Rabinowitz introduced the *directional model*, where more partisan (extreme)
parties are actually advantaged than centrist ones. Such a model would support
voters moving towards partisanship, although the model has been criticised by
@westholm and @lewis_king_1999. Lastly, the issue-priority model is
one where parties distinguish themselves by identifying with a set of issues
and policies. Depending on which issue is currently the most salient, voters
will vote for the party who has identified most strongly with those issues. For
example, if inflation is high, voters will vote for parties on the right, and
if health services deteriorate, voters will not punish a ruling left-of-center
party as they know the incumbent will make that a priority.

As the sociological mechanism was shocked by the sudden "defreezing" of the
1970s, many have claimed that it lacks explanatory power—specifically, that it
ceases to be relevant when social groups change or when new and cross-cutting
issues arise.  Such a characterisation is supported by @clarke_et_al_2005,
who claims that "sociological models can tell only a limited part of the story
of political choice in Britain... The fundamental limitations of sociological
models are their inability to deal with information that lacks an obvious
social group referent, and their inability to keep pace with the short- and
medium-term changes in the variables they purport to explain". While the
criticism is by and large fair, it fails to allow the possibility of
established parties changing their positions of competition over the
medium-to-long term, and in fact this is exactly what has happened as
elucidated in Levendusky, where party elites clarify the party position.

Overall, I believe that a combination of the sociological mechanism and the
issue-priority model can explain both short- and long-term electoral change.

\begin{center} $\clubsuit$~$\clubsuit$~$\clubsuit$ \end{center}

In this essay, I have shown that voters still exhibit stable links to established parties despite great changes in the electorate, as parties were able to adapt to these changes. I have shown that the theory of *realignment* rather than *dealignment* better explains intertemporal voter behaviour, and that this helps to answer several open questions. Specifically, I have shown that parties have successfully incorporated post-materialist issues in their party positions, and that both sociological and institutional theories have their place in explaining voter choice.

\onecolumn{
\section{References}
}

